DropDownBox: add Search in Embedded Components topic (#8854)
DevExpress/devextreme-documentation: concepts/05 UI Components/DropDownBox/20 Search in Embedded Components/05 Search by Regular Field (DataGrid).md

> This topic covers search by a regular (non-lookup) field in a [DropDownBox](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/') with an embedded [DataGrid](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDataGrid '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDataGrid/'). The approach uses [`DataSource.searchExpr`](/api-reference/30%20Data%20Layer/DataSource/1%20Configuration/searchExpr.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Configuration/#searchExpr') and [`DataSource.searchValue`](/api-reference/30%20Data%20Layer/DataSource/3%20Methods/searchValue(value).md '/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Methods/#searchValuevalue') to filter rows as the user types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial adds a search/filter capability to a [DropDownBox](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/') with an embedded [DataGrid](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDataGrid '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDataGrid/'). The example assumes that the search field is not a lookup field. The code uses [`DataSource.searchExpr`](/api-reference/30%20Data%20Layer/DataSource/1%20Configuration/searchExpr.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Configuration/#searchExpr') and [`DataSource.searchValue`](/api-reference/30%20Data%20Layer/DataSource/3%20Methods/searchValue(value).md '/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Methods/#searchValuevalue') to filter rows as the user types.
```

Author: "The example assumes that the search field is not a lookup field" this just buries the scope in the middle of the paragraph. My "search by a regular (non-lookup) field" states the scope in the first sentence which is where readers need it to decide whether this article applies to them

Reviewer: I was writing it for a person who maybe found this article using Google. You seem to assume that they came here from another article that lists two different implementation methods? 

Basically, I wanted to use shorter sentences. And listing components first makes sense to me. The components involved are just as important for my understanding as the type of field.

Author: I assume that even if they come from Google, this exact article is literally on the same page with Overview (the one with a table). This is a continuation, they are on the same page, why would I assume they read only this part out of context?

Reviewer: Oh - sorry, I thought those were different articles. If it's on the same page, you can change the order.

> [note] This example uses a plain DataGrid data structure. For search through a lookup column, see [Search by Lookup Column (TreeList)](/concepts/05%20UI%20Components/DropDownBox/20%20Search%20in%20Embedded%20Components/10%20Search%20by%20Lookup%20Column%20(TreeList).md '/Documentation/Guide/UI_Components/DropDownBox/Search_in_Embedded_Components/Search_by_Lookup_Column_(TreeList)/').

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[note] For a similar example that involves a lookup column, see [Search by Lookup Column (TreeList)](/concepts/05%20UI%20Components/DropDownBox/20%20Search%20in%20Embedded%20Components/10%20Search%20by%20Lookup%20Column%20(TreeList).md '/Documentation/Guide/UI_Components/DropDownBox/Search_in_Embedded_Components/Search_by_Lookup_Column_(TreeList)/').
```

The full working code is available in the GitHub repository:

#include btn-open-github with {
    href: "https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devextreme-dropdownbox-filter-data-in-nested-widget"
}

### 1) Configure DropDownBox to Accept User Input

> - Enable [`acceptCustomValue`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/acceptCustomValue.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#acceptCustomValue') so the user can type text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Activate [`acceptCustomValue`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/acceptCustomValue.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#acceptCustomValue') so the user can type text.
```

---
##### jQuery

    <!-- tab: index.js -->
    $('#gridBox').dxDropDownBox({
        acceptCustomValue: true,
        valueChangeEvent: '',
        openOnFieldClick: false,
        // ...
    });

##### Angular

    <!-- tab: drop-down-grid.component.html -->
    <dx-drop-down-box
        [acceptCustomValue]="true"
        valueChangeEvent=""
        [openOnFieldClick]="false"
        ...
    >
    </dx-drop-down-box>

##### Vue

    <!-- tab: DropDownBoxWithDataGrid.vue -->
    <DxDropDownBox
        :accept-custom-value="true"
        value-change-event=""
        :open-on-field-click="false"
        ...
    />

##### React

    <!-- tab: DropDownGrid.tsx -->
    <DropDownBox
        acceptCustomValue={true}
        valueChangeEvent=""
        openOnFieldClick={false}
        ...
    />

##### ASP.NET Core Controls

    <!--Razor C#-->
    @(Html.DevExtreme().DropDownBox()
        .AcceptCustomValue(true)
        .ValueChangeEvent("")
        .OpenOnFieldClick(false)
        // ...
    )

---

### 2) Create a `DataSource` That Supports Search

> Search is implemented with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following `DataSource` members:
```

    <!-- tab: DropDownGrid.tsx -->
    import AspNetData from 'devextreme-aspnet-data-nojquery';
    import { DataSource } from 'devextreme-react/common/data';

    const dataSource = new DataSource({
        store: AspNetData.createStore({
            key: 'OrderNumber',
            loadUrl: `${url}/Orders`,
        }),
        searchExpr: 'Employee',
    });

##### ASP.NET Core Controls

    <!--Razor C#-->
    @(Html.DevExtreme().DataGrid<SampleOrder>()
        .DataSource(d => d.Mvc().Controller("SampleData").LoadAction("Get").Key("OrderID"))
        .DataSourceOptions(op => { op.SearchExpr(new[] { "CustomerName" }); })
        // ...
    )

---

### 3) Configure `displayExpr`

Use [`displayExpr`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/displayExpr.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#displayExpr') to define how a selected record is displayed in the input:

    function displayExpr(item) {
        if (!item || typeof item !== 'object') return '';
        return `${item.Employee}: ${item.StoreState} - ${item.StoreCity} <${item.OrderNumber}>`;
    }

### 4) Configure the Embedded DataGrid in `contentTemplate`

> Use DropDownBox [`contentTemplate`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/contentTemplate.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#contentTemplate') to render the DataGrid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure the DropDownBox component.  Use [`contentTemplate`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/contentTemplate.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#contentTemplate') to embed a DataGrid.
```

> To use focused and selection row features, specify the following settings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To activate focused row and single row selection, specify the following settings:
```

            .Paging(p => p.PageSize(10))
            .FocusedRowEnabled(true)
            .FocusedRowKey(new JS("component.option('value')"))
            .RemoteOperations(true)
            .AutoNavigateToFocusedRow(false)
            .Scrolling(s => s.Mode(GridScrollingMode.Virtual))
            .Selection(s => s.Mode(SelectionMode.Single))
            .SelectedRowKeys(new JS("[component.option('value')]"))
            .Height("100%")
            .Width("100%")
            .ColumnAutoWidth(true)
            .Columns(columns =>
            {
                columns.AddFor(m => m.OrderID).Caption("ID");
                columns.AddFor(m => m.OrderDate).Format("shortDate");
                columns.AddFor(m => m.CustomerName);
                columns.AddFor(m => m.ShipCountry);
                columns.AddFor(m => m.ShipCity);
            })
            .OnSelectionChanged("function(e){ dataGridSelectionChanged(e, component); }")
            .OnKeyDown("dataGridKeyDown")
            .OnContentReady("function(e){ dataGridContentReady(e, component); }")
            .OnInitialized("dataGridInitialized")
        )
    }

---

### 5) Implement Search in `onInput`

> Use the DropDownBox [`onInput`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onInput.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onInput') event to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Handle the DropDownBox [`onInput`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onInput.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onInput') event:
```

        dataSource.off('changed', onChanged);
    }, []);

    const onInput = useCallback((e: DropDownBoxTypes.InputEvent) => {
        if (searchTimer.current) clearTimeout(searchTimer.current);
        searchTimer.current = setTimeout(() => {
            if (!gridBoxOpened) setGridBoxOpened(true);
            const text = e.component.option('text');
            dataSource.searchValue(text ?? null);
            if (isSearchIncomplete(e.component)) {
                dataSource.on('changed', onChanged);
                dataSource.load().catch(() => {});
            }
        }, searchTimeout);
    }, [dataSource, gridBoxOpened, searchTimeout]);

##### ASP.NET Core Controls

    function onInput(e) {
        clearTimeout(searchTimerId);
        searchTimerId = setTimeout(() => {
            const dropDownBox = e.component;
            if (!dropDownBox.option('opened')) dropDownBox.open();
            performSearch({
                dropDownBox,
                dataSource: getGridDataSource(),
                grid: dataGridInstance,
            });
        }, searchTimeout);
    }

---

### 6) Detect Whether the User Is Searching (`isSearchIncomplete`)

> The `isSearchIncomplete` function returns `true` if the user has changed the input text and a new search must be applied (that is, `text` differs from the current `displayValue`):

Reviewer: I don't follow this part. `displayValue` doesn't seem to be a predefined property for DropDownBox. And how it is different from input text? This code must set this value to some "current applied filter" at some point. But I don't see where it's done. 

```suggestion
The `isSearchIncomplete` function returns `true` if the user has changed the input text and the component must execute another search operation:
```

Author: You are right, it's not documented. It's my oversee.
Probably should write smth like

```suggestion
The `isSearchIncomplete` function returns `true` if the user has changed the input text and a new search must be applied. It compares `text` (what the user typed) against the component's internal `displayValue` (the formatted display text of the currently selected value):
```

    function isSearchIncomplete(dropDownBox) {
        let displayValue = dropDownBox.option('displayValue');
        let text = dropDownBox.option('text') || '';
        displayValue = displayValue && displayValue.length && displayValue[0];
        return text !== displayValue;
    }

### 7) Focus Management in `onOpened`

> When the popup opens, move focus into the DataGrid. Use DropDownBox [`onOpened`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onOpened.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onOpened').

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the popup opens and the DropDownBox raises its [`onOpened`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onOpened.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onOpened') event, move focus into the DataGrid.
```

            const triggerCondition = gridFirstLoadCompleted
                ? args.name === 'opened'
                : args.name === 'focusedRowKey' || args.name === 'focusedRowIndex';
            if (triggerCondition) {
                grid.off('optionChanged', handleOptionChanged);
                requestAnimationFrame(() => {
                    grid.focus();
                    if (gridFirstLoadCompleted) grid.option('opened', false);
                });
            }
        };
        dataGridInstance.on('optionChanged', handleOptionChanged);
        if (gridFirstLoadCompleted) {
            dataGridInstance.option('opened', true);
        }
        const isTextEqualToDisplayValue =
            dropDownBox.option('text') === dropDownBox.option('displayValue')[0];
        const shouldClearSelection =
            (dropDownBox.option('value') && !dropDownBox.option('text')) ||
            !isTextEqualToDisplayValue;
        if (shouldClearSelection && dataGridInstance.option('selectedRowKeys').length) {
            dataGridInstance.option('resetSelection', true);
            dataGridInstance.option('selectedRowKeys', []);
        }
    }

---

> ### 8) Reset State in `onClosed`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 8) Reset Component State in `onClosed`
```

> When the popup closes, DropDownBox [`onClosed`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onClosed.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onClosed') restores consistent state if the user typed something but did not confirm a selection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the popup closes, the DropDownBox raises its [`onClosed`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onClosed.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onClosed') event. Process situations when the user typed a search string but did not make a selection.
```

Author: I feel like the imperative directed at the reader is not what we need here. Because my sentence explained what `onClosed` does, not what the customer should do

Reviewer: We can change the second sentence. But the main thing here is that I don't like phrases like "DropDownBox [`onClosed`]". 

If we can just go full code style, then great. We can just change that part to `DropDownBox.[onClosed]`. The rest can stay the same then. 

But here's where I see the issue with regular text. If you have an office and the office has door, you can say "the office door is locked". No possessive needed here, that's standard usage. But if you refer to someone by name (Vladimir) and want to mention that their shirt is dirty, you can't say "Vladimir shirt is dirty". You need to use a possessive form - "Vladimir's".  

DropDownBox is more like a name - it seems weird to me here that there's no possessive. And I don't want a possessive either, because then it's "DropDownBox's onClosed", which also sounds weird. 

So, the bottom line is you can keep my first sentence (and change the second one), or simply use the period/dot between class and event names.

> Typically:

Reviewer: The list can simply follow the previous paragraph. 

```suggestion

```

        if (!hasLoadedItems) {
            dropDownBox.reset('');
            dataSource.searchValue('');
            dataSource.load().catch(() => {});
            return;
        }
        if (text && text !== displayValue[0]) {
            const firstKey = dataGridRef.current?.instance().getKeyByRowIndex(0);
            dispatch({ type: 'SELECT_VALUE', value: firstKey });
        }
    }, [dataSource]);

##### ASP.NET Core Controls

    function onClosed(e) {
        const dropDownBox = e.component;
        const hasLoadedItems = dataGridInstance.getVisibleRows().length;
        const text = dropDownBox.option('text');
        const displayValue = (dropDownBox.option('displayValue') || [])[0];
        if (!hasLoadedItems) {
            dropDownBox.reset(null);
            dataSource.searchValue('');
            dataSource.load();
            return;
        }
        if (text && text !== displayValue) {
            const firstKey = dataGridInstance.getKeyByRowIndex(0);
            dataGridInstance.selectRows(firstKey);
            dataGridInstance.option('focusedRowKey', firstKey);
        }
    }

---

> [note] This approach supports single selection only. To implement multiple selection, use the [TagBox](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTagBox '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTagBox/') component instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[note] This implementation supports single row selection only. To implement multiple selection, use the [TagBox](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTagBox '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTagBox/') component instead.
```

Author: Same comment
